I recently worked on a project for a client where there was a large amount of conflict between the delivery teams and the business stakeholders. When reviewing the experience it became clear to me that a lot of the conflict was accentuated by if not directly caused by the poor use of plans. 

When I joined as a consultant to help them the company was more than a year overdue on a multi-million pound project that was central to the way it did business. Many of the decisions that had been made early on in the project such as the choice of vendor etc were in my experience wrong as they had left them with few options to change course or adapt. In future I’ll write about some of these decisions but this post is going to focus solely on the way the organisation used plans and the problems these caused.

I joined in late 2016 just as the organisation had missed a deadline that they had set themselves and were going through another stage of re-planning. What struck me was that the deadlines were set by the business, they weren’t due to any external drivers which meant they should have been in the perfect position to deliver the software iteratively, instead the plan was built around a ‘big bang’ approach and all the risks that entails.

The plans were derived by a central programme office which barely spoke to the individual delivery teams. A launch date was decided upon and teams were told when they had to have their part of the overall delivery ready. Unsurprisingly this lack of communication with the teams meant almost every deadline was missed. The response would then be to re-plan but these re-planning sessions never involved an open conversation between the different groups about what had gone wrong and so an opportunity to learn and adapt was missed and the cycle would repeat itself. 

It was not a surprise to find the relationship between the business stakeholders, who were the ultimate users of the platform, and the IT delivery teams was not great. The business were being told the dates that their product would be delivered and then those dates were not being met. It was understandable that they felt a lack of trust in the delivery teams. The delivery teams were equally frustrated as they felt dates were being imposed on them they were not able to adapt or change the scope to fit those dates. Any estimates they gave were held as promises rather than a best guess with the information available.

What needed to happen was to accept that different parts of the organisation have different needs and for those groups to collaborate on any high-level planning. The business felt the need to understand enough progress to be able to organise training and communication to 3rd parties who would also be affected. The delivery teams wanted to be able to adapt to changes without being held to hard dates and then blamed when things would change.

Our recommendation was to move to a continuous delivery approach with frequent drops of working software that would have allowed the business to learn and adapt. This led to greater collaboration and communication and replaced the false certainty of a plan with the real certainty of being able to see and use an actual product. We achieved this in some areas of the overall programme and the result was to bring those aspects of the project back on track. The hope is the business will learn from that and take the same approach on the rest of the programme.
